---
date: 2015-11-08T09:14:02-08:00
author: jason
draft: true

title: Rituals
seo_title:
slug: rituals
description:

category:
-

tag:
-

images:
- /images/jason-lengstorf.jpg

videos: []

discussion_link:

---
I've had trouble writing over the last few months.

It's not writer's block. I haven't even been _trying_ to write.

It's bumming me out, because writing makes me happy. I like trying to untangle the shit going on in my head, and writing is where I have a chance to tug at the threads of my thoughts and actions to see where they come from.

When I realized I hadn't written anything in weeks, I knew I was screwing up. I was ignoring my own advice. I needed to [find time to do the things I care about]({{< ref "blog/find-time.md" >}}).

## Why Can't I Stick to the Things I Want to Do?

What I was curious about, though, was _why_ I'd fallen off track. I didn't suddenly forget that I liked writing. I hadn't shifted focus away from writing. And I certainly hadn't forgotten the advice I was giving to other people: [_if it's important, do it every day_]({{< ref "blog/do-it-every-day.md" >}}).

The way I planned it seemed simple enough: do a couple working blocks on my critical projects, then dedicate one to writing.

So what was going wrong? Why was I failing to do something that I both enjoyed doing _and_ considered valuable to my happiness?

I don't have the answers, and I'm sure that I'll come up against this problem again in the future, but I have a two-part theory that seems to fit right now:

1. I had too many active demands on my time.
2. I was running into context problems.

### What are active demands?

I consider myself to be pretty motivated. I like creating things. So to the logical part of my brain, taking some time to write each day seems like it should be a foregone conclusion.

However, _taking time to write_ is its own activity. I have to make an active decision to stop what I'm doing and start writing.

That makes writing an "active demand": something I have to do consciously, and with effort — however small.

My schedule has lots of small, active demands, such as forcing myself to put on gym clothes when I'd rather stay in bed, or closing down the software project I'm working on to write for a while.

These demands are trivial. They're not _hard_ or _important_ decisions; they're just things that require conscious choice and willpower.

There's research suggesting that [willpower is an exhaustible resource](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703478704574612052322122442). Even if there wasn't, I know that **if I have to make a lot of active decisions throughout the first part of my day, by the afternoon I am _fucking done_ for the day.**

So as active demands pile up — no matter how small they are — my willpower drains. By the time I've fought off my inner fatshit and dragged myself to the gym, stepped through the rest of my morning activities, settled in to work on my current project, and put in a solid few hours of programming, I just don't have enough willpower left to force myself to switch contexts and start writing.

### How does context fit into this?

I'm a firm believer that [the key to high productivity is context-based scheduling]({{< ref "blog/scheduling-maximum-productivity.md" >}}).

In order to keep myself productive, I group all of my tasks by the _kind of work_ they require: email and social media and catching up with family in one group; software, accounting, and complex problem solving in another; creative efforts like design and writing in a third.

Under my initial plan — work on software for a couple blocks, then do a block on writing — I was able to break up the contexts the way I prefer. In theory, this should have been easy for me.

In practice, however, it wasn't happening. I'd usually end up doing a third block on the software projects and defer the writing to "later".

I'm chalking this up to a two-part contextual problem.

#### 1. I wasn't taking a long enough break between context-shifting blocks.

Ten or fifteen minutes is plenty when I'm planning to go back to a similar context in my next block, but it can take as long as an hour to _truly_ shift contexts.

So while I was coming into my third block with the right intentions, I was still thinking with my programmer brain, and that meant writing sounded worse than continuing to solve whatever problems I'd been working on for the last couple hours.

#### 2. I had the tasks ordered backward.

My creative brain gets tired faster than my programmer brain,[^variable] so after a couple programming blocks I'm too mentally tired for creative writing, but I still have plenty left in the tank for coding — I was inadvertently sabotaging myself by trying to write last.

[^variable]:
    The cognitive loads that demand more vary from person to person. I think I'm less taxed by the analytical processes because I have much more practice solving logical problems than creative ones. Someone who's been writing for decades and just picked up programming may feel exactly the opposite.

## Solving the Problem

If my theory is true, **I'm failing to write consistently because I'm running out of willpower.** I've been requiring myself to make a conscious decision to sit down and write, and I've been placing that decision in a context that made the decision more difficult.

The solution, then, is something that addresses both challenges:

1. The decision to write should be a passive demand.
2. The context for writing shouldn't be competing with other contexts.

### Make decisions passive by creating a routine.

I have a bedtime routine: I set my phone to charge in a place away from the bed, floss and brush my teeth, and bring water to my bedside. If I break this routine, I feel off.

But if I try to change the order — say brushing my teeth and flossing, then sitting in bed with my phone for a while — I almost always fail to put my phone away. I'll sit there for an extra hour scrolling through social media.

The routine, though, never fails when it's followed. I've never gotten _out of bed_ after settling in to go get my phone.

This is because the routine takes away the active demands: _on my way_ to brush my teeth, I plug my phone in.

I don't have to _decide_ to plug it in. It's an established step in a longer process: I do it "on the way" to something else.

This is what other smart people call a [habit trigger](http://jamesclear.com/habit-triggers): something in my environment or in my mind that cues me to do something else. Think "socks and shoes" — those are actually two distinct acts, but we've combined them as a cultural routine where putting on socks triggers putting on shoes.

So if I want to be consistent as a writer, I don't need to _decide_ to write every day. I need to make sure that writing is _part of what I do every day_.

This is my first objective: **I need a writing trigger.**

### Do the more demanding thing first.

The two things I struggle most to stay consistent with are writing and going to the gym.

These are both things that I like, and that make me feel good when I stay consistent with them. But they're also things that cause me discomfort.[^discomfort] So if I give myself an out, it's _very easy_ for me to take it — even though I know I'll be happier if I don't.

[^discomfort]:
    When I'm writing, I'm frustrated because the thought in my head that was so brilliant when I wrote down an article idea is feeling flat — and it's definitely because I'm not writing it well.<br><br>In the gym, I'm cursing this do-squats-until-you-throw-up-or-pass-out workout because _OH GOD IT BURNS SO DEEP!_

I also know that there's a strong correlation between the number of hours I've been awake and the number of excuses I'll make to avoid things that aren't comfortable and easy for me. This is due to willpower fatigue.[^experiment]

[^experiment]:
    In a [willpower experiment](http://www.opiniondynamics.com/2013/12/decision-fatigue/), two groups of people were asked to remember numbers. Group One was given a two-digit number; Group Two received a sevn-digit number. After memorizing it, both groups were offered a snack: cake or fruit. The group that put a lot of mental effort into memorizing a seven-digit number was _almost twice as likely_ to choose cake. After one fucking mental challenge. Our willpower is _frail_.

Since both writing and working out present a challenge for my willpower, and my willpower is strongest in the morning, it seems like a good idea to try and do both early on.

This brings me to a second objective: **I need to work _with_ willpower — rather than against it — by front-loading the tasks that challenge my willpower most.**

## How a Morning Routine Might Solve All My Problems

With my two objectives — create a writing trigger and front-load hard tasks — I set out a couple weeks ago to address my writing lapse.

I had seen about a trillion articles about "successful people"[^air-quotes] and their "morning rituals" — and promptly blew them off as fetishizing an Early Bird Gets the Worm mentality.

[^air-quotes]:
    I'm air-quoting this definition of success, because I don't believe that "powerful" or "rich" means "successful" — a millionnaire CEO who can't get away from work long enough to spend time with his kids or enjoy the money he's earning sounds more like a failure to me.

But between the Steve Jobs quotes and 4:30am[^ritual] wake-up recommendations, there's a pattern in these rituals:

[^ritual]:
    I want to make something perfectly clear: **I do not give a fuck what time you wake up.** I think time is a stupid thing to fixate on, and saying that someone who wakes up at 5am will be more successful than someone who wakes up at 10am is absurd and patently false.

**Most of these rituals involve doing things that most people struggle to do consistently _first thing in the morning_.**

This is exciting, because it's anecdotal evidence that my theory is correct, and that I'll be able to meet my two objectives using a morning routine.[^sad]

[^sad]:
    It's also a little sad because — as usual — I've been looking at the answer for years in other people's success, and I just didn't bother to pay any attention until after I'd gone through the hassle of reinventing the solution on my own.

### Building the Routine

With my objectives in mind, I went to work creating my own morning ritual. Here's what I'm currently doing each morning:

- Wake up without an alarm[^alarm]
- Spend a few minutes doing my blink-dumbly-and-stare thing, then grab a coffee
- Read a few articles to get my brain engaged[^articles]
- Open my laptop and write for about 90 minutes
- Walk to the gym and work out
- Head to breakfast with Marisa
- Go home, shower, and start work on whatever is on my list for the day

[^alarm]:
    I know it's not an option for everyone, but if you can remove the alarm from your life, _do it._ When I wake up naturally, I have energy and I'm ready to get started.

[^articles]:
    I read industry blogs so I can at least pretend I understand what's happening in my professional field, and imaginatively bizarre posts from sites like [McSweeney's](http://www.mcsweeneys.net/articles/its-decorative-gourd-season-motherfuckers) to help kickstart my own creativity.

And before I go too much further, I want to note that _the only thing that changed in my ritual was to add reading and writing before the gym_. Before, I'd wake up, have coffee, work out, and head to breakfast. Now I was going to have coffee _and write_, then work out and head to breakfast.

A small change, and one that — so far at least — has resulted in total success.

## Why the Routine Works

After a couple weeks of following this new routine, I've been amazed by the results. Based on how I feel about things, I think there are lots of small reasons that add up to this big difference.

### 1. I've removed the active demand.

I don't have to _decide_ to write. I just know that once I have coffee, I'm going to open my laptop and put some words down. **The routine states that writing is a thing that _will happen_.** It's no longer a thing that I will _try to make happen if I have the time and also don't get too hungry first_.

### 2. I have a trigger habit.

I grab my laptop _on the way back_ from grabbing coffee. I'm reminded every morning by the act of getting coffee — a thing I do every day — to get my laptop. **The trigger makes the first step toward writing almost automatic.** Like socks and shoes.

### 3. I have more willpower (and creativity) in the morning.

Saying no to cheesecake is very, very easy to do first thing in the morning. My willpower tank is overflowing. When I put writing first, **I can leverage my own brain chemistry to make it easier to do the stuff I want to do.** This removes the need to rely on willpower later in the day, when the tank is low.

### 4. I'm creating an "extra" work day with a really long break between contexts.

A surprise benefit of the morning routine was a feeling of having two "work days" each day. Before, I'd sit down after breakfast to work, and I'd have three or four working blocks with short breaks before shutting down for the day. The working blocks could be split between contexts, but — as I realized earlier — it was harder to shift into some contexts than others.

By adding a _huge_ break of two or three hours between my first working block (in the writing context) and my second, third, and maybe fourth working blocks (in the development or communication contexts, typically), I noticed a big difference: **taking hour-plus breaks between context shifts gave me an enormous boost in energy and focus when I came back to work.**

My second working block felt like my first — a workout and breakfast is a full-on reset button that leaves me so refreshed it's like I never did the first working block at all, from a fatigue or context lock-in standpoint.

I still spend the same amount of time working as before — I just break it apart differently, to incredible results.

### 5. The new routine is so easy to follow that it doesn't feel like work.

In the past, I've tried to implement new standards for myself, struggled to keep them up with varying levels of success, and ultimately found myself sliding back toward the baseline where I started.

The successes I've had never felt like successes, though, because they were all so effortless that I barely noticed the change.

This routine falls in the latter category, because I don't feel a strain implementing this new routine. I didn't have to start waking up earlier, or "grinding out" a little extra for my own good.

Instead, I rearranged the things I was already doing in a way that effortlessly and painlessly created space for something rewarding. **I didn't create a struggle for the sake of progress; I _removed_ a struggle (trying to force myself to write in the afternoon) and progress followed.**

## Things That Have Nothing To Do With Why the Routine Works

I think it's worth mentioning that I didn't claim my routine is working _because of the things I'm doing, or the order in which I'm doing them_.

It doesn't matter _what_ I'm doing. **What matters is that I've organized the things I consider important into an order that works _for me_** in a way that leverages _my body's natural rhythms_.

I'm more creative in the mornings, and writing is harder for me than code. Working out gives me energy that carries me through the day. A slow breakfast with my girlfriend keeps me relaxed and gives us time to be together before we both start working.[^ignoring-you]

[^ignoring-you]:
    We often work in the same coffee shop. The people around us probably think we're the worst: "Jesus, those two haven't even _looked_ at each other since they sat down. Just threw on headphones and opened their laptops. You see?! _This_ is what's wrong with our culture, Miriam! _This_ is why everything is in the shitter! People don't talk anymore!"

But this works for me because it is specifically built for me. If I tried to adopt a millionnaire CEO's morning routine, I'd be miserable.[^four-am]

[^four-am]:
    I'm still convinced that 4:30am is just something that old people made up to scare us into behaving — like the bogeyman, or rural Mississippi.

The trick to a successful routine isn't mimicking someone else; it's looking at their approach, understanding the reasons they did it that way, and applying that strategy to your own unique situation in a way that actually fits _you_.

## Is This Forever?

I sincerely doubt that I'll follow this routine until I die. Later, when I have new information, or a new situation, or a different priority, I will inevitably change my approach.

But for now, **I've been able to get in an hour and a half of writing every day** since I kicked it off without getting less done elsewhere. For now, I don't feel guilty about ignoring something I care about.

For now, this routine is good enough for me.
