---
publish: false
date: 2014-02-07

title: Miss Montana
seo_title: How to Hit It Off with a Beauty Queen...and Then Totally Blow It
slug: miss-montana
description: >
  How I met Miss Montana, found out we had unbelievable chemistry, and then completely blew my chances with her. Twice.

category:
- motivation
- storytelling

tag:
- confidence
- stories
- regret

images:
- /images/miss-montana-regret.jpg

cta: default
---

Years back, before I moved to Portland, I used to haunt a bar called Al's and
Vic's in Missoula, Montana.

This was one of those dives where it was too loud to hear yourself think and the
floor was _always_ sticky, but they sold a bucket of PBR for four dollars, and a
Montana Happy Meal[^happymeal] for five.

[^happymeal]:
  A shot of Jameson with a PBR back.

On a night where I'd been called in as wingman for Scott, we met with his date
and — for the span of a beer — I did my best not to make him sound like a
degenerate.

His date, whose name I don't remember but whose face looked like a Bernadette,
told us her friends were arriving and would we mind standing at the bar with
them.

Bernadette introduced us to her friends, Mandy and Kate. Mandy, it turns out,
was a friend of Scott's, and the two of them pulled Bernadette into
conversation, leaving Kate and I to fend for ourselves.

Kate was beautiful. Like, _holy shit_ good-looking — the kind of attractive that
usually requires about a grand's worth of Photoshop cleanup.

I, on the other hand, was wearing a cowboy shirt with pearl snaps, sporting an
extra twenty pounds or so, and unshaven in the not-sexy way.

Still, despite my homeless desperado ensemble, we hit it off immediately.

She was funny, sharp-witted. I was scrambling to keep up, but she was laughing.
The hoarse mating calls of a hundred college kids were muffled under the sound
of her voice, like bourbon over fine-grit sandpaper.

The faces around us blurred and faded; it was just me and Kate and my beer and
her whisky diet and this moment.

My brain was leaking that special cocktail of chemicals that only happens the
first time you make a connection with someone. In that moment I understood how
people can meet and fall in love and end up making long-term promises to each
other in front of an Elvis impersonator — all in the span of one intense night.

The spark between us had magnetized the air; my heart was trying to pull out of
my chest.

Bernadette reappeared over Kate's shoulder, and the room snapped back into
focus.

Mandy was with her, and Scott returned a moment later with a fresh bucket of
beer.

Scott gave me a _how'd it go for you_ look. I tried not to look upset about the
interruption.

The girls did their secret eye contact telepathy thing, and Bernadette started
preparing her exit. Mandy and Kate took her cue and started gathering their
purses and phones.

Kate caught my eye as she swung her coat around her shoulders, and my heart went
all squishy and weird.

I formed the words in my brain — _ask for her number_ — opened my mouth to speak
— _ask for her number, you idiot!_ — and I said, "It was really nice meeting
you. Have a great night."

She might have hesitated. I was too disgusted with myself to notice. The next
thing I knew I was watching her hair bounce in the red bar-glow as she walked
away.

I thought of running after her, telling her I couldn't let her get away without
knowing I could see her again.

_Maybe that's romantic? Probably creepy. Better not._

I thought of asking Scott for Bernadette's number so I could call her and ask
for Kate's.

_That's even worse. Stop it. All of your ideas are bad._

I did nothing. I watched the door close behind her. My mouth was probably
hanging open.

And Scotty — never one to pass up a kidney punch — said, "Blew that one, huh?"

I took the beer he offered and did a poor job of acting nonchalant.

"You know who she is, right?"

I shook my head.

There's a special kind of schadenfreude that only men experience. It occurs when
we watch a friend — hitting it off with a woman who is clearly out of his league
— suddenly and spectacularly self-destruct.

I was a teeball benchwarmer. Kate was one good season away from the big show.

Scotty was so darkly gleeful he should have been stroking a Persian cat as he
said, "She was Miss Montana last year."

_Goddammit._

I had a shot with Miss Montana, and I let her walk out of the bar. After fifteen
minutes of great conversation and good chemistry.

I replayed the moments before she left in my head. I met her eyes. _She was
waiting for you to ask._

I had a shot. I did nothing.

## The (Wasted) Second Chance

A couple weeks later, I was out with Scotty again.

It was late, and we had slunk into the bar everyone despised. The sign on the
door said "Bodega", but it may has well have been called You're Hammered Again &
None of the Girls Will Talk to You, Huh?

Out front, I bummed a cigarette off a stranger and wobbled gently.

"Jason?"

I wheeled and found myself facing Kate. I immediately stamped out my cigarette.
I could feel the air starting to magnetize again.

Kate smiled. And then she hugged me. Her hair smelled like vanilla-scented
heaven.

I smelled like an ashtray full of whiskey.

"So how are you?" I managed to ask.

"Great! Oh, by the way, these are my brothers, Jeff and Mark," she said,
motioning to the two frighteningly large men who flanked her.

I nodded. They nodded back, then pretended not to pay attention while this
drunken asshole in front of The Saddest Bar in Missoula tried to flirt with
their sister.

But somehow we just fell back into it. She teased me about my smoking, I poked
fun at the shoes she was carrying, and we both laughed. My heart did the
squishy-weird thing again.

And then it was time to make the move. Her brothers weren't going to stand there
all night, and I needed to head back inside before Scott ordered me any more
drinks.

_Get her number._

I tried scraping every last bit of courage off the walls of my rib cage.

_Just ask. Ask for her number._

I tried to think of a line.

_Here's a line, dickhead: "Can I get your number and call you sometime?" Just.
Ask._

And then I caught eyes with the larger of her two brothers. And then I wondered
if I'd misread the whole situation and she was just being nice to me. And then I
froze.

"Well, hey, it was great seeing you again. I should probably get back inside."

_Idiot. Idiot. Idiot._

I flushed. I couldn't even make eye contact.

As suddenly as she'd appeared, Kate — Miss Montana — the gorgeous, funny girl I
love-at-first-sighted (twice) was gone into the night. For good this time.

## Lost in the Woulds

We would have been a great couple. She would have had a secret family recipe for
waffles and a mean Scrabble game. Maybe her disturbingly attractive genes would
compensate for my hairiness and we'd make the world's hottest babies.

She would have shot me down. We'd have only had another thirty seconds of good
conversation left in us. She would have had a boyfriend. I would have hated her
guts after two weeks of hanging out. Or, more likely, she'd have hated mine.

I would have made a thousand wonderful memories, starting with the one where I
asked if I could call and she said yes.

I would have made a thousand mistakes and alienated myself from the Montana
Beautiful Women's Club[^mtbwc] forever.

[^mtbwc]:
  Totally a thing.

Any of those outcomes would have been fine. Even bad experiences are still
_experiences_, you know?

But the _wondering!_ The wondering is murder. There's no lesson to learn in
_not_ trying.

There's just the nagging of an unanswered question.

So now, I'm not the guy who took a long shot with a beauty queen and succeeded
against the odds.

I'm also not the guy who took a shot and missed.

I'm just a guy who had a shot and stood there looking foolish while the clock
ran out.
