---
date: 2014-01-02

title: The No-Distractions Productivity Experiment
seo_title: The No-Distractions Productivity Experiment
slug: no-distractions-experiment
description: >
    Yesterday I sat down and designed, developed, and wrote content for a new site. Now I need to find a way to stay this productive consistently.

category:
- remote-productivity

tag:
- GTD
- productivity

images:
- /images/2013-04-23-16.07.15.jpg

cta: focus
---

Yesterday I sat down and designed, developed, and wrote content for this new
site. If you work on the web, or if you've hired a web designer before, you know
this is crazy talk. But _it happened._

All things considered, I spent about ten hours on it, broken up by a trip to the
gym, lunch, and dinner. This is a very simple site, too, which definitely played
a big part in the quick turnaround.

I don't like admitting that I set a New Year's resolution, because I'm painfully
aware of how many January 1 promises I've made and immediately broken. However,
this site has been on my back burner for months now, and between the time off
for the holiday, my back-logged desire to work on it, and the general "let's do
**everything**" energy that accompanies a perceived fresh start, I finally built
up enough momentum to start.

Taking a web project from concept to launch in one day is very, _very_ rare, so
I kind of surprised myself by pulling it off.

I loaded the new files up on the server and flipped the switch with a kind of
fuck-yeah-I'm-unstoppable feeling.

It got me thinking about how I've historically handled momentum, and how it
usually starts an upswing in productivity, followed by frustration when I can't
keep up the heroic pace I've set for myself.

## No Distractions

Most of the reason I was able to finish this site in such a short time frame is
that I shut off all distractions: no email, no phone calls, no chat; just
headphones, coffee, and good ol' blood-and-sawdust resolve.

This isn't my usual state of affairs. In fact, I only pulled it off because it
was a holiday and I should have been taking time off in the first place.

On a normal day, tuning out distractions would mean grumpy clients, stalled
contractors, lost leads, and an ever-growing todo list -- all of which add up to
outweigh the benefits of how much work gets done.

## Finding a Balance

Routine is hard for me. I instinctively buck authority, even if the rules are
self-imposed.

My default mode is very freeform; I drive Ali nuts by constantly improvising and
telling her, "Relax. [Life is jazz.][1]"

However, seeing how much I was able to accomplish with all the distractions
turned off, I wonder how effective I could be if I allocated one or two days a
week as "no distractions" days, during which I would cut off communications and
just get a big chunk of work done.

I've toyed with the idea before, but I've never fully implemented it.

## The Experiment

Next Tuesday, I'm going to have a distraction-free day. It's going on my
calendar. My team will be notified. An autoresponder will be set on my email.

Serious business.

If the experiment works, I should be able to focus on and -- hopefully --
complete one or two large tasks.

It should also have the added benefit of making me feel less guilty if I spend
the days before and after buried in email or on the phone, which is a common
source of stress for me.

**Have you tried this split style of working before?** Any tips to help me get
it right the first time? Let me know in the Facebook discussion.

**UPDATE:** The experiment went well, and I've [posted the results][2] for
review. Short version: this is something I'm going to try and integrate into my
workflow once a week or so.

[1]: /jazz/
[2]: /no-distractions-results/
